

Chapter 1

Managers and You in the Workplace

In this introductory chapter, your students will explore the concepts of management, manager skills, and organizations in today’s dynamic business environment.

LEARNING OBJECTIVES	

1.	Tell who managers are and where they work.
•	Know how to manage your time.
2.	Explain why managers are important to organizations.
3.	Describe the functions, roles, and skills of managers. 
•	Develop your skill at being politically aware.
4.	Describe the factors that are reshaping and redefining the manager’s job.
5.	Explain the value of studying management.

It’s Your Career	

The ABC’s of Managing Your Time

Time is a unique and valuable resource and focusing on time management is one aspect of management that can be tremendously useful to students in their lives. This chapter opens with an emphasis on the importance of time management and outlines the ABCs of managing your time. Time that is wasted can never be replaced and unlike most resources, time is distributed equally across people. We all receive the same amount of time: 24 hours per day or 168 hours each week, but some people are much more efficient at using their allotted time. Here are some suggestions to help you better use your time:

1. Make and keep a list of all your current, upcoming, and routine goals. Know what needs to be done daily, weekly, and monthly.
2. Rank your goals according to importance. Not all goals are of equal importance. Given the limitations on your time, you want to make sure you give highest priority to the most important goals.
3. List the activities/tasks necessary to achieve your goals. What specific actions do you need to take to achieve your goals?
4. Divide these activities/tasks into categories using an A, B, and C classification. The As are important and urgent. Bs are either important or urgent, but not both. Cs are routine—not important nor urgent, but still need to be done. 
5. Schedule your activities/tasks according to the priorities you’ve set. Prepare a daily plan. Every morning, or at the end of the previous workday, make a list of the five or so most important things you want to do for the day. Then set priorities for the activities listed on the basis of importance and urgency.
6. Plan your to-do list each day so that it includes a mixture of A, B, and C activities/ tasks. And it’s best to spread the three types of tasks throughout your day so you’re not lumping together all your demanding tasks. Also, be realistic about what you can achieve in a given time period.
7. Recognize that technology makes it too easy to stay connected. Just think for a moment how many phone calls, e-mails, texts, postings on social media, and unscheduled visitors you receive on a typical day. Some are essential to the tasks at hand, while others are distractions that do not require immediate attention. Prioritize the importance of this information.
8. Realize that priorities may change as your day or week proceeds. New information may change a task’s importance or urgency. As you get new information, reassess your list of priorities and respond accordingly.
9. Remember that your goal is to manage getting your work done as efficiently and effectively as you can. It’s not to become an expert at creating to-do lists. Find what works best for you and use it!
CHAPTER OUTLINE


1.1	WHO ARE MANAGERS AND WHERE DO THEY WORK? 
Managers may not always be what we expect. Today’s managers range from 18 to 80, they‘re found in a variety of different types of organizations, and they perform a variety of jobs from the top to the bottom of the organization. Statistics show an increasing number of women in management; however, while their number is increasing, it is mostly in the area of lower and middle management, not top management. Similarly, only 20 (4%) were minorities. 
Who Is a Manager?
A.	The changing nature of organizations and work often requires employees in formerly nonmanagerial jobs to perform managerial activities. Students who are preparing for careers on any organizational level can benefit from acquiring management skills. Today’s employees need to be cross-trained and multi-skilled. 
B.	How do we define a manager? A manager is someone who coordinates and oversees the work of other people so that organizational goals can be accomplished. However, keep in mind that managers may have additional work duties not related to coordinating the work of others. 
C.	Managers can be classified by their level in the organization, particularly in traditionally structured organizations—those shaped like a pyramid (see Exhibit 1-1).
1.	First-line (or front-line) managers (often called supervisors) are typically involved with producing the organization’s products or servicing the organization’s customers. These managers are located on the lowest level of management.
2.	Middle managers include all levels of management between the first level and the top level of the organization. They may have titles such as regional manager, project leader, store manager, or division manager.
3.	Top managers include managers at or near the top of the organization who are responsible for making organization-wide decisions and establishing plans and goals that affect the entire organization. 
	Where Do Managers Work?
A.	An organization is a deliberate arrangement of people to accomplish some specific purpose. Organizations share three common characteristics (See Exhibit 1-2): (1) each has a distinct purpose; (2) each is composed of people; and (3) each develops some deliberate structure so members can do their work.
B.	Although these three characteristics are important in defining what an organization is, the concept of an organization is changing. These changes include: flexible work arrangements, employee work teams, open communication systems, and supplier alliances. Organizations are becoming more open, flexible, and responsive to changes.

	Future Vision: Is It Still Managing When What You’re Managing Are Robots?	
While the text presents a fairly accurate description of today’s workplace, the future is not certain. Work life in the future may be very different than today and will likely include workers who are robots. How will a manager’s job be different? How will working with robots affect human coworkers? 

The following discussion questions are posed:
Talk About It 1: What’s your response to the title of this box: Is it still managing when what you’re managing are robots? Discuss.

Talk About It 2: If you had to “manage” people and robots, how do you think your job as manager might be different than what the chapter describes?

Student answers to these questions will vary.



1.2	WHY ARE MANAGERS IMPORTANT?
	Managers have an important impact on both employees and the organizations in which they work. The following three reasons address their importance:
A.	Organizations need their managerial skills and abilities more than ever in these uncertain, complex, and chaotic times. 
	B. 	Managers are critical to getting things done.
C.	Managers do matter to organizations! According to a Gallup poll of tens of thousands of managers and employees, the relationship of manager to their employees and supervisors is the single most important variable in employee productivity and loyalty. 

1.3	WHAT DO MANAGERS DO? 
A.	Management involves coordinating and overseeing the work activities of others so that their activities are completed efficiently and effectively.
1.	Coordinating and overseeing the work of others is what distinguishes a managerial position from a nonmanagerial one.
2.	Efficiency is getting the most output from the least amount of inputs in order to minimize resource costs. Efficiency is often referred to as “doing things right” (see Exhibit 1-3).
3.	Effectiveness is completing activities so that organizational goals are attained and is often described as “doing the right things” (see Exhibit 1-3).
B.	Management Functions.
Henri Fayol, a French industrialist in the early 1900s, proposed that managers perform five management functions: POCCC (planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating, and controlling). 
1.	Over time, Fayol’s five management functions have been reorganized into four functions, which provide a foundation for the organization of many current management textbooks (see Exhibit 1-4).
a.	Planning involves defining goals, establishing strategies for achieving those goals, and developing plans to integrate and coordinate activities.
b.	Organizing involves arranging and structuring work to accomplish the organization’s goals.
c.	Leading involves working with and through people to accomplish organizational goals. 
d.	Controlling involves monitoring, comparing, and correcting work performance.
2.	In practice, managing is not always performed in a sequence as outlined above. Since these four management functions are integrated into the activities of managers throughout the workday, they should be viewed as an ongoing process.
C.	Mintzberg’s Management Roles and a Contemporary Model of Managing.
Henry Mintzberg, a management researcher, conducted a precise study of managers at work. He concluded that managers perform 10 different roles, which are highly interrelated. 
1.	Managerial roles refer to specific categories of managerial behavior (see Exhibit 1-5).
a.	Interpersonal roles include figurehead, leadership, and liaison activities.
b.	Informational roles include monitor, disseminator, and spokesperson.
c.	Decisional roles include entrepreneur, disturbance handler, resource allocator, and negotiator.
2.	Follow up studies of Mintzberg’s role categories in different types of organizations and at different managerial levels within organizations generally support the idea that managers perform similar roles.
3.	Although the functions approach represents the most useful way to describe the manager’s job, Mintzberg’s roles give additional insight into managers’ work. 


LEADER MAKING A DIFFERENCE
Ursula Burns, CEO of Xerox, was the first African-American woman to lead a Fortune 500 Company. Starting as a summer engineering intern more than 30 years ago, Ms. Burns has a reputation for being bold. She took on the established culture of Xerox, known for being polite, courteous, and discreet with her bold talk and blunt attitude. Her challenge at Xerox is crafting strategies that will help it prosper and be an industry leader in a digital age where change is continual.

What can you learn from this leader making a difference?

D.	Management Skills.
Managers need certain skills to perform the challenging duties and activities associated with being a manager.
1.	Robert L. Katz found through his research that managers need three essential skills (see Exhibit 1-6).
a.	Technical skills are job-specific knowledge and techniques needed to proficiently perform specific tasks.
b.	Human skills involve the ability to work well with other people individually and in a group. 
c.	Conceptual skills involve the ability to think and to conceptualize about abstract and complex situations.
d.	Other skills are listed in Exhibit 1-7. These skills will be highlighted in a feature at the end of each chapter.
2.	Developing management skills are important for aspiring managers. To help aid students in this respect, the authors have put together several skill-building modules in mymanagementlab. These skills reflect a broad cross-section of the important managerial activities that are elements of the four management functions.

1.4	HOW IS THE MANAGER’S JOB CHANGING? 
Security threats, corporate ethics scandals, global economic and political uncertainties, and technological advancements should be discussed. While all managers will not have to manage under tragically demanding circumstances, how managers manage in today’s workplace is changing. These issues are summarized in Exhibit 1-8.
A. Focus on the Customer.
	With all of the technology available to managers, it is possible now more than ever to lose touch with customers. Face-to-face contact is being replaced by e-mails and text messages. In a service-oriented economy, like the United States, the need to deliver high quality customer service is the basis for competitiveness. As a result, many managers are re-discovering the importance of a customer-responsive organization where employees are friendly, courteous, accessible, and responsive to customer needs. 
B. Focus on Technology.
	Cloud computing, social media, and robotics are all changing how things get done in the workplace. Managers need to get employees on board with new technology and ensure that they are comfortable with it, can use it, and understand how it improves their lives. 
C. Focus on Social Media.
The new frontier in communication is social media. Platforms such as Facebook and Twitter have moved beyond personal uses to work and managers need to understand their power and dangers. In some cases, social media can enhance customer relationships, help better manage customers, and tap into talent. But, managers need to remember that social media is a tool that needs to be managed to be beneficial.
D. Focus on Innovation.
 	Innovation is critical to today’s organizations and managers. All organizations innovate; however, a problem for organizations is working to get all employees involved in the innovation process. Managers can respond to this need by creating a “team close,” a time when all employees are scheduled to close the store and leave together. This helps create an attitude of working together and commitment.
E. Focus on Sustainability.
Today’s organizations agree that the time has come for managers to embrace both sustainability and green management. Sustainability has been defined as a company’s ability to achieve its business goals and increase long-term shareholder value by integrating economic, environmental, and social opportunities into its business strategies. This view widens the concept of social responsibility to include twenty-first century environmental issues (i.e. the greening of management) and global societal challenges. 
F. Focus on the Employee.
Companies like L.L. Bean recognize the importance of treating employees well not only because it’s simply the right thing to do but also because it is good business. In these progressive organizations, managers regularly provide performance feedback that serves as an evaluation of an employee’s performance and provides the foundation for discussing developmental opportunities. Successful managers often embrace work-life practices and provide encouragement to employees who wish to use them.

1.5	WHY STUDY MANAGEMENT? 
	The importance of studying management in today’s dynamic global environment can be explained by looking at the universality of management, the reality of work, and the rewards and challenges of being a manager. 
A.	The Universality of Management.
Without a doubt, management is needed in all types and sizes of organizations, at all organizational levels, and in all organizational work areas throughout the world (see Exhibit 1-9).
1.	We interact with organizations every day of our lives. Every product we use, every action we take, is provided by or affected by organizations. Well-managed organizations develop a loyal customer base, grow, and prosper.
2.	Students who study management gain the ability to recognize and encourage good management practices; just as important, they learn to recognize poor management and how to correct it.
B.	The Reality of Work.
After graduation, students will either manage or be managed. A course in management provides insight and understanding about behaviors of supervisors and the internal operations of organizations. An individual does not have to aspire to be a manager in order to benefit from taking a course in management.
C.	Rewards and Challenges of Being a Manager (See Exhibit 1-10).
1.	Challenges
a.	Being a manager is hard work and often involves more clerical duties than managerial responsibilities. Managers often must deal with a range of personalities, make do with limited resources, and work in chaotic and uncertain situations.
b.	Managers may have difficulty in effectively blending the knowledge, skills, ambitions, and experiences of a diverse group of employees.
c.	A manager’s success typically is dependent on others’ work performance.
2.	Rewards
a.	Managers have an opportunity to create a work environment in which organizational members can do their work to the best of their ability and help the organization achieve its goals.
b.	Managers often receive recognition and status in the organization and in the larger community; influence organizational outcomes; and receive appropriate compensation.
c.	Knowing that their efforts, skills, and abilities are needed by the organization gives many managers great satisfaction. 
D. 	Gaining Insights into Life at Work.
	Understanding management concepts and how managers think is important even for those students who are not planning a career in management. Doing so will helps students get better results at work and enhance their careers.


ANSWERS TO REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS	

Student answers to these questions will vary.

1-1. What is a manager? How do managers differ from nonmanagerial employees?
The answer to this question used to be straightforward, but the line between managerial and nonmanagerial employees has blurred as more employees take on tasks once reserved for managers. To keep the answer from becoming too complicated, the best way to address this question is to focus on the fact that a manager’s job is about helping others do their work. (LO: 1, Tell who managers are and where they work, AACSB: Analytical thinking)

1-2.	Why are managers important to organizations?
There are three key reasons why managers are important to organizations. First, organizations need the managerial skills and abilities that managers provide. Second, 
Managers are essential to getting things done. Third, research shows that the single most important variable in employee productivity and loyalty is the quality of the relationship between employees and their direct supervisors. (LO: 2, Explain why managers are important to organizations, AACSB: Analytical thinking)

1-3. In today’s environment, explain which is more important to organizations—efficiency or effectiveness?
Both are integral to effective management. Management refers to the process of coordinating and integrating work activities so that they’re completed efficiently and effectively with and through other people. Efficiency is getting the most output from the 
least amount of inputs, the goal of which is to minimize resource costs (see Exhibit 1-2). Effectiveness is completing activities so that organizational goals are attained; often described as “doing the right things” (see Exhibit 1-2). (LO: 2, Explain why managers are important to organizations, AACSB: Analytical thinking)

1-4.	Is your course instructor a manager? Discuss in terms of managerial functions, managerial roles, and skills.
Course instructors (in contrast to individuals who hold positions such as department head) are not usually classified as managers. In most situations, a course instructor does not fall within the definition of a manager when utilizing managerial functions, mainly because students are clients rather than employees. In some cases, an instructor has little input about course content or how it should be taught. In these instances, the instructor makes few managerial decisions. 

In terms of managerial roles, course instructors may be involved in some ways in the interpersonal, informational, and decisional roles. For example, a course instructor could be seen as a liaison (interpersonal role), a monitor and disseminator (both informational roles), and a disturbance handler and negotiator (both decisional roles).

Regarding managerial skills, course instructors certainly need technical skills—knowledge about the latest research and conceptual developments in a particular discipline. They also need significant human skills as they interact with their students. To a limited extent, the instructor utilizes conceptual skills as courses are planned or as departmental curriculums are debated. (LO: 1, Tell who managers are and where they work, AACSB: Reflective thinking)
“
1-5.	Why is it important for managers to focus on the customer?
Delivering consistent, high-quality customer service is essential to the success of companies. Studies show that 92 percent of customers whose issues are resolved during their first contact with the company are likely to continue to use that company. In contrast, just 51 percent of customers whose issue is not resolved during first contact continue to use the company. Customer-responsive organizations where employees are friendly and courteous, accessible and knowledgeable, prompt in responding to needs, and willing to do what’s necessary to please the customer are likely to me more successful in today’s competitive market. (LO: 4, Describe the factors that are reshaping and redefining the manager’s job, AACSB: Reflective thinking)
  
1-6.	Is it more important for managers to focus on technology or innovation? 
Innovation is critical throughout all levels and parts of an organization. Exploring new territory, taking risks, and doing things differently are all part of a successful organization. Technology is changing the way things get done. Getting employees on board presents a challenge to many managers. Managers must work with employees to understand why new technology is an improvement over present ways of conducting business. (LO: 4, Describe the factors that are reshaping and redefining the manager’s job, AACSB: Reflective thinking)

1-7.	Explain why the universality of management concept still holds true or doesn’t hold true in today’s world.
Management principles are needed for the efficient and effective operation of organizations, regardless of the level of the manager or the industry in which they operate. This is true for today’s organizations now more than ever. The global environment of today ensures that organizations will face staunch competition. Failure and weakness on the part of management ultimately leads to loss of market share and organizational closure. Also, gone are the days when managers could ‘bluff’ their way through their dealings with employees who have become more demanding and aware of their legal rights. (LO: 5, Explain the value of studying management, AACSB: Reflective thinking)

1-8.	“Management is undoubtedly one of humankind’s most important inventions.” Explain why you do or do not agree with this statement. 
While most people do not see ‘management’ as an invention, it is safe to say that without the principles of management and the guidance of managers in organizations, we as a society would not have reached the level of development that we enjoy today. The goal of management centers on the art of getting things done. Without organizations and their managers, it would be impossible to accomplish what has been done in history so far. It is has always been up to managers to coordinate and oversee work activities in the art of getting things done in the areas of agriculture, medicine, science, and manufacturing. (LO: 5, Explain the value of studying management, AACSB: Reflective thinking)


PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS	

Student answers to these questions will vary.


ETHICS DILEMMA	

Student answers to these questions will vary.

With less than half of companies saying they provide their managers with training opportunities and more than a quarter not knowing whether career management programs are working, it’s no wonder that moving to a management position can be difficult. (LO: 3, Describe the functions, roles, and skills of managers, AACSB: Ethical understanding and reasoning)

1-11.	Explain why an organization does or does not have an ethical responsibility to assist its new managers in their new positions.

1-12.	What could organizations and employees do to make the transition into a management role easier?
   

SKILLS EXERCISE: DEVELOPING YOUR POLITICAL SKILLS	

As referenced in Exhibit 1-7, there are many skills important to managers. One important skill is their ability to understand and navigate political situations. In this exercise, students work on building their own political skills based on 4 steps: developing networking ability, working on gaining interpersonal influence, developing social astuteness, and being sincere. Students are encouraged to take notes to track their progress and then to evaluate their own level of political skill development. (LO: 3, Describe the functions, roles, and skills of managers, AACSB: Analytical thinking)


WORKING TOGETHER: TEAM EXERCISE	

In groups of three to four individuals, students are asked to discuss their experience with both good and bad managers. Students should make a list of both good and bad management behaviors and relate these to the functions of management and which management skills they think it falls under.  After the groups develop their list, they should share with the rest of the class. (LO: 3, Describe the functions, roles, and skills of managers, AACSB: Written and oral communication)


MY TURN TO BE A MANAGER	

•	Use the most current Occupational Outlook Handbook (U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics) to research three different categories of managers. For each, prepare a bulleted list that describes the following: the nature of the work, training and other qualifications needed, earnings, and job outlook and projections data.

•	Get in the habit of reading at least one current business periodical (Wall Street Journal, BusinessWeek, Fortune, Fast Company, Forbes, etc.). Keep a file of interesting information you find about managers or managing.

•	Explore the social media presence of your favorite company. Like their Facebook page and follow them on Twitter, Instagram, and/or any other social media outlet the company uses. 

•	Interview two different managers and ask them the following questions: What are the best and worst parts about being a manager? What’s the best management advice you ever received? Type up the questions and their answers to turn in to your professor.

•	Accountants and other professionals have certification programs to verify their skills, knowledge, and professionalism. What about managers? Two certification programs for managers are the Certified Manager (Institute of Certified Professional Managers) and the Certified Business Manager (Association of Professional in Business Management). Research each of these programs. Prepare a bulleted list of what each involves.

•	If you have work experience, consider managers who you have encountered. Did you work with any good managers? Did you work with any bad managers? Based on your experience, create a list of traits or skills that good managers possess.


ANSWERS TO CASE APPLICATION 1 QUESTIONS	

Student answers to these questions will vary.

The Power of Social Media 

1-13.	Why is it important for the ALSA management team to understand the importance of social media in their work?
Because ALS does not receive much federal funding, raising money to sponsor research into finding a cure is critical. The Ice Bucket Challenge in 2014 demonstrated the power of social media in drawing attention to ALS. In just over a month, the ALSA raised $115 million, a significant increase over the $23 million that was raised throughout the entire previous year. Given the success of the Ice Bucket Challenge, social media has proven to be a strong alternative to more traditional approaches to fundraising. (LO: 4, Describe the factors that are reshaping and redefining the manager’s job, AACSB: Analytical thinking)
     
1-14.	Do you think the ALSA can continue to rely on the Ice Bucket Challenge to support the organization’s fundraising efforts? Why or why not? 
Responses to this question will vary. Many students will probably suggest that a repeat of the Ice Bucket Challenge is unlikely to generate the same level of response as the initial effort. (LO: 4, Describe the factors that are reshaping and redefining the manager’s job, AACSB: Analytical thinking)
 
1-15.	Do you think the Ice Bucket Challenge would have had the same success if the management at ALSA initiated the challenge? 
Responses to this question will vary. Many students will probably suggest that the endorsement of professional sports figures and other public figures probably increased the success of the fundraiser. (LO: 4, Describe the factors that are reshaping and redefining the manager’s job, AACSB: Analytical thinking)

1-16.	What can the ALSA learn from this experience to help the organization take advantage of the power of social media in the future?
Responses to this question will vary. Students should demonstrate an understanding of the power of social media as a marketing tool. (LO: 4, Describe the factors that are reshaping and redefining the manager’s job, AACSB: Analytical thinking)


CASE APPLICATION 2 QUESTIONS	

Student answers to these questions will vary.

Who Needs A Boss?

1-17.	What is a holacracy? 
Students should recall that the holacracy is an organizational structure that eliminates the traditional vertical hierarchy. The holacracy is an organizational system with no job titles, no managers, and no vertical hierarchy. The idea of this arrangement is to focus on work and not a structure where decisions can get hung up. (LO: 1, Tell who managers are and where they work, AACSB: Analytical thinking)

1-18.	What benefits do you see to an organization where there are no job titles, no managers, and no hierarchy?
Most students should recognize that the holacracy organizes work around 
self-governing employee circles. These circles are types of overlapping employee “groups” but with more fluid membership and individual roles/responsibilities. In these circles, employees can take on any number of roles, and anyone can initiate a project and implement innovative ideas. 
One possible benefit of this system is to create an organization where members will pool ideas and watch out for each other. The goal is radical transparency and to get more people to take charge. Yet, trusting individuals who probably know the details of the job better than any “manager” to work conscientiously, creatively, and efficiently is good as long as there is a way to keep standards high. (LO: 4, Describe the factors that are reshaping and redefining the manager’s job, AACSB: Analytical thinking)

1-19.	What challenges does a holacratic approach have?
There are several challenges presented by this approach. While the holacracy eliminates managers, it does not eliminate structure and accountability. The organization will have to monitor employees to make sure they have enough roles to fill their time and fit in with the culture. Also, leaders will emerge and it will be important to look for dominant authority figures, which could cause resentment and rebellion. Another challenge will be to figure out who has the ultimate authority to hire, fire, and decide pay. (LO: 4, Describe the factors that are reshaping and redefining the manager’s job, AACSB: Analytical thinking)

1-20.	Discuss why you would or would not like to work in an organization like this?
While the holacracy is a new approach, students might draw on their previous experiences on self-governing teams like academic group projects. Some students may be concerned that this approach presents opportunities for an uneven distribution of work. Others may be concerned that the lack of an organizational hierarchy may cause problems with communication and decision-making. However, you can expect that some students will be very excited about this concept as it may reduce organizational politics and give everyone the same chance to contribute to the organization and to be an entrepreneur, regardless of their seniority with the company. (LO: 5, Explain the value of studying management, AACSB: Analytical thinking)
While the holacracy is a new approach, students might draw on their previous experiences on self-governing teams like academic group projects. Some students may be concerned that this approach presents opportunities for an uneven distribution of work. Others may be concerned that the lack of an organizational hierarchy may cause problems with communication and decision-making. However, you can expect that some students will be very excited about this concept as it may reduce organizational politics and give everyone the same chance to contribute to the organization and to be an entrepreneur, regardless of their seniority with the company. (LO: 5, Explain the value of studying management, AACSB: Analytical thinking)

